This is a pretty rough translation that I'm mainly doing for my own reference,
to make sure I'm reasonably aware of the backstory that the in-game text refers
to. I haven't worked too hard on it; don't take the details too seriously. I'm
also only doing the parts necessary for understanding the backstory; this does
not include the "how to play" pages or anything.

A scan of the original manual is available at
https://archive.org/details/LagoonX68000. 

Map page
--------

これが冒険の舞台だ！
この世界を救うことができるのは
ナセル、君だけだ！
This is the setting of the adventure! Only you, Nassel, can save this world!

Story
-----

序章
Prologue

百億の星の流れは　闇を求め
またさらなる星の流れは　光を求め
神々の落とした涙　月の光を生み
その光をもって　 闇を照らすであろう
A stream of billions of stars... seeking the dark...
And a stream of yet more stars... seeking the light...
Tears shed by the gods... the birth of moonlight...
Holding this light... may the dark be illumined...

　　　　　　　　　　　この伝説を語れるのは、
限られた者だけになってしまったというが ……。
Though it is said that few now tell this legend...
(lit: It is said that, as for the telling of this legend, there have come to be
 only limited people, but...)

　去りし日、過去歴300年初日。レイクリーランドの地には、闇がはびこ
り始めていた。この地に平静を取り戻すべく、辺境から7人の魔導士が
集結した。後らは太古の秘術を用い、神を召喚した――はずだった。が、
そこには凄惨な鬼気とともに、邪神が上体をもたげていた。
　空気の流れが乱れ、魔導士達の体を怒涛が襲った。闇より深い闇が、
そこには存在していた。邪神と魔導士達の闘いは凄絶を極め、邪神の強
大な力の前に屈するかとおもわれた。
が、仲間を犠牲にするという禁断の呪法により、かろうじて封印するこ
とができた。そのため、7人のうち3人が呪文の犠牲になり、残ったのは、
マティアス、ゼラー、デュマ、バトラーの4人だけであった。重々しい恐
怖がしばらくの間、彼らの体を縛りつけていた。安堵感が意識を覚醒さ
れたのは、鳥のざわめく声が聞こえた時であった。だが、安らいだ表情
の中に、どす黒い欲望の影を落としていた者がいたことを他の者は見て
とっただろうか――。
In distant days, this was the day that began these past 300 years.[1] In the
land of Lake Leland, darkness was beginning to spread. To restore peace to this
land, seven mages gathered from its frontiers. Making use of ancient arts,
they[2] summoned forth God[3]—or so they intended. But then, as the air turned
grim[4], a demon lifted its torso.
A tempest swept about them, and the mages' bodies were assailed by its rage.[5]
There existed there a darkness deeper than darkness. The struggle between the
mages and the demon was violent to the extreme, and it seemed that they would
yield before the demon's mighty power.
However, by means of a forbidden ritual said to use one's allies as sacrifices,
they were barely able to seal it. For this purpose, three of the seven were made
sacrifices for the ritual, and only four remained—Mathias, Zerah, Duma, and
Battler. For a deeply dreadful moment, their bodies were bound. But the
reassurance that restored their senses came when they heard the voices of birds
astir[6]. However, amid those relieved expressions, did the others realize that
there was one who cast a shadow of dark desire...?

[1] This seems to be some pretty fancy literary language, and I'm not too sure
    what to make of it. I think this is pretty much what it comes down to, but I
    can't be sure.
[2] This is pretty clearly written 「後ら」 in the text, but there's no such word as
    far as I can tell. Pretty sure it's just a typo for 「彼ら」.
[3] Or "a god." I don't have any terribly strong reason to go one way or the
    other.
[4] lit: However, at that time, along with a gruesome ghastliness...
[5] lit: The flow of air was disturbed, and the turbulence assailed the mages'
    bodies.
[6] lit: As for the feeling of relief that awakened their consciousness, it was
    when the rustling voices of birds were heard.
  
　　　　　　　　　　　　　その男――ゼラーは、
邪神の圧倒的な力に魅せられ、その力を手中に納め
ようとしていた。しかし自分だけでは、あれ程の力
を操ることができないと踏んだゼラーは、太古の文
献にある<闇の皇子>を搜し出すことにした。
That man—Zerah—was fascinated by the demon's overwhelming power, and sought to
make that power his own. However, concluding that he could not control that
degree of power alone, Zerah chose to seek the <Dark Scion>[1] from ancient
documents.

[1] 「皇子」 is pronounced the same as 「王子」 (prince), but it specifically refers to
    a son of the emperor, which is more srs bsns than just some plain old
    prince. "Imperial Prince of Darkness" is pretty unwieldy in English, though,
    so we'll go with this.

　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　　<闇の皇子>は神々の戦いが終わって
から数百億年後に、闇の神々の生れ変りとしてこの世に現れ、その姿は普通の
人間に似てその肌の色は不気味な程白く、金髮をたなびかせ、この世ならぬ美
しい姿をしているという。ただひとつ違うのは、瞳の色が左右違う邪眼であり、
見る者を恐れさせるということだけだろうか。
They said that billions of years after the end of the battles of the gods, the
<Dark Scion> would appear in this world as a reincarnation of the dark gods, in
a form similar to a normal human, with uncannily pale skin, trailing golden
hair, and beautiful like nothing of this world. But the one extraordinary thing
was that it would have evil eyes whose colors were mismatched, and that alone
would cause fear in all who saw it.

　　　　　　　　　　　ゼラーが <闇の皇子>
を捜し出す旅に出てから300年の月日が流れて
いた。レイクリーンランドの北方に浮かぶ小さ
な名もない島に、一人の赤ん坊が生まれた。灰
色の右目、赤色の左目をもつその子は「ソア」と
名付けられた。彼は、この世に生を受けたその
瞬間から、全ての者に忌み嫌われていた。
300 years have passed since Zerah began his journey in search of the <Dark
Scion>. On a small nameless island that lay in the north of Lake Leland[1], a
baby was born. This child, who had a gray right eye and a red left eye, was
given the name "Thor." And from the moment he came into the world, he was
loathed by all.

[1] This is written as "Lake Leanland" or something, with an extra 「ン」, in the
    original, but that spelling isn't used anywhere else, so I think it's just a
    typo.

　　　　　　　　　　　　　　まだ産み月に満たないうち
に、母親の腹を破って生まれ、その上産声のひとつもあげ
なかった。
そしてはにより皆を恐れさせたのは、彼の瞳の色である。
それは伝説にもある、邪眼と呼ばれるものであった。
　ソアの誕生以来、家畜が病気にかかったり、作物のでき
が悪いと、全て彼の邪眼のせいだということにされた。そ
んな不幸な境遇と引き換えのように、彼には不思議な力が
与えられていた。２歳になる頃には言葉を完全に話すこと
ができたし、明日起こる出来事を何もかも予言してみせた
りもした。だが、そのような力も周りの人間を恐れさせる
だけであった。しかし、ただひとりそんなソアを哀れに思
い、彼を引きとり育ててくれた老婆がいた。エルワーとい
う名のその老婆は、５歳になったソアを呼びこう言った。
He tore his way from his mother's womb when the month of his birth had barely
begun, and moreover, he cried[1] not at all.
And that which caused fear in everyone was the color of his eyes.[2] Just as in
the legend, they were called evil eyes. 
After Thor's birth, livestock were sickened and crops were poor, and his evil
eyes were said to be the cause of it all. As though in exchange for these
disasters, he developed mysterious powers. Around his second birthday, he was
able to speak perfectly, and he was also able to predict whatever would happen
on the next day. But such powers also led only to more fear from the humans
around him. Nonetheless, there was one ordinary old woman who felt pity for this
Thor and took on his upbringing. This old woman, named Elwah, called to Thor
when he reached his fifth year, and spoke thus:

[1] Specifically, 「産声」 refers to a baby's cries immediately after birth. 
[2] 「そしてはにより」 seems like an odd combination of grammar, and I'm not sure quite
    how to interpret it.

『ソアや、よくお聞き。確かにおまえは、他の子と少し違
うかもしれない。あたしはみんなが言うように、おまえを
厄介者だなんて思っちゃいたい。本当はやさしい子だよの
ね。だがらあたしはおまえにみんなと仲良くやっていって
ほしいんだ。』
『でも、ばあちゃん。みんなが僕をいじめるんだ。』
『それはよく解っているよ。でもね、おまえは賢い子だか
ら言うが、あたしはもう長くはない。あたしが死んだらお
まえどうやって生きていくんだい？』
『ばあちゃんが病気なのはわかってたよ。でも僕一人なん
て絶対にいやだ。』
『情けないことを言うんじゃない。男の子だろう。』
"Thor, listen to me. Certainly, you may be a bit different from other children.
 But I'm starting to think you're taking me for granted, like everyone says. You
 really are a gentle child. So I want you to get along with everyone."
"But Nan, everyone is mean to me!"
"I'm well aware of that. But you know, they also say you're a clever child, and
 I won't be here long. How are you going to get by when I die?"
"I know you're sick, Nan. But there's no way I can be on my own!"
"Don't say pathetic things. Aren't you a big boy?"

　それから三日後、エルワーは息をひきとった。その時ソ
アは一筋の涙もこぼさなかった。エルワーの葬儀が終わっ
た頃、ローブをまとった老人がソアの前に現れた。
『搜しましたぞ。闇の皇子よ。さあ、私と一緒に来て頂き
ましょう。』
『誰だ？おまえは。』
『御身にお仕えする、ゼラーと申します。』
　それから13年、ソアはゼラーの元で厳しい修行に耐えた。
どんなものにも負けない、強い力を手に入れるために。
Three days later, Elwah breathed her last, and Thor shed not a tear on the
occasion. Near the end of Elwah's funeral, an old man in robes came before Thor.
"I have been seeking you, O Dark Scion. I ask now that you come with me."
"Who are you?"
"Your servant Zerah, my lord."
And for the next thirteen years, Thor endured rigorous training with Zerah, to
gain great power which no one would overcome.

　　　　　　　　　　　　――方、ソアの誕生から
約１年後、アトランドの刀鍛冶の家では<ムーンブレ
イドの勇者>となるべき右肩に三日月のあざのある
男の子が生まれた。両親はその子をナセルと名付け
た。
ナセルは活発で、心優しい少年に育った。幼い頃か
ら、父親の作った剣で武道に親しみ、すでに非凡な
才能を見せていた。
　ある日、ナセルの家に１人の修行僧が訪れた。そ
の修行僧は、名をマティアスと名乗った。彼は、ム
ーンブレイドの勇者がナセルに相違ないこと、ムー
ンブレイドを作るのは、父親のロイであろうことを
話した。そしてこのレイクリーランドを闇の手から
救えるのは、<ムーンブレイドの勇者>であるナセル
だけだと。
Meanwhile, about a year after the birth of Thor, in the house of a weaponsmith
in Atland, a boy was born with a crescent-shaped birthmark on his right shoulder
that predicted he would be the <hero of the Moonblade>. His parents named him
Nassel.
Nassel was raised a lively and kindhearted youth. At an early age, he took
easily to swordsmanship using the blades made by his father, and already
displayed prodigious skill. 
One day, a monk visited Nassel's house. The monk introduced himself as Mathias.
He said that the hero of the Moonblade was undoubtedly Nassel, and that he hoped
Nassel's father Roy would be the one to make the Moonblade. And that Nassel, the
hero of the Moonblade, was the only one who could save Lake Leland from the hand
of darkness.

　両親は驚いたが、4年間だけという条件をつけて、
ナセルをマティアスのもとに預けることにした。4年
間ナセルは、剣技と魔法、そして自分の宿命をマテ
ィアスから学び、故郷の町に帰ってきた………。
 ――そして風は伝説の成就を告げた――
Although Nassel's parents were surprised, they entrusted Nassel into Mathias'
care, on the condition that it be for only four years. For four years, Nassel
studied swordsmanship and magic, and his own destiny, under Mathias, and now has
returned to his home town...
—And the winds heralded the fulfillment of the legend—

ムーンブレイドの伝説
The Legend of the Moonblade

　その昔、神々の戦いで使われた聖剣の破片
は、地上に落ちて鉱石となり、気の遠くなる
様な永い時をその地中で過ごしている。
　その鉱石は、不思議な魔力を持ち、その鉱
石で鍛えた剣は邪悪な神と戦える唯一の武器
となる。
　誰もがこの伝説の剣の魅力にとりつかれ、
その鉱石を探し求めるが、誰一人としてみち
帰ることのできた者はいない。事の真偽は別
としてそれを見たという人間の話を聞くと、
その鉱石は乳白色に光輝き、まるで湖に映っ
た月のように美しいと云う。その話から、そ
の石はムーンストーン、聖剣はムーンブレイ
ドと呼ばれるようになった。そのムーンブレ
イドを手にすることができるのはたった一人、
選ばれた勇者だけなのだ。勇者が手にすれば
ムーンブレイドは羽のように軽くなり、主人
の意のままに動き、魔法の光を発するのだ。
しかし、ムーンブレイドが主人と認めない者
がその柄を握れば、たちまち大地と同化した
かのごとく重くなり、その者に奇妙な幻想を
見せるであろう。
　伝説によれば、ムーンブレイドの勇者は、
右肩に月の形をした傷が、生まれながらにつ
いている。その勇者は、闇を支配するものの
誕生から、ちょうど1年後に生まれ、いずれ
は闇と戦うことになるという。
Many ages ago, fragments of a holy sword used in the wars of the gods fell to
earth, became mineral veins, and waited endlessly within the earth. 
This mineral possessed magical powers, and a sword forged from it would become
the only weapon able to battle against evil gods. 
Many were charmed by the allure of the sword's legend and sought out this
mineral, but none was able to return with it. 
Regardless of their veracity, in stories told by humans who said they had seen
it, the ore was said to glow milky white, beautiful like the reflection of the
moon on a lake. Because of those stories, the stone came to be called the
Moonstone, and the sword, the Moonblade. Only one person, the chosen hero, can
hold the Moonblade. In the hands of the hero, the Moonblade will become feather-
light, moving as its master wills, and emitting a magical light. However, if a
person the Moonblade does not recognize as its master grasps its hilt, it will
become suddenly heavy as though they hold the earth itself, and that person will
be shown strange illusions[1]. 
According to the legend, the hero of the Moonblade be marked at birth with the
shape of the moon on their right shoulder. The hero will be born exactly one
year after the one who controls the darkness, and in time will battle the
darkness. 

[1] This bit about seeing visions or illusions if you're not supposed to touch
    the Moonblade is oddly specific, and I'm probably not describing it as well
    as the original writer intended. I don't believe this detail is ever
    relevant to the plot of the game, though.

王家の血筋
The Royal Lineage

　レイクリーランドの王家には、ラグーン城を
移動させる力が備わっている。特に第一皇女に
は、その血が色濃く受け継がれている。だがそ
の力を、国が危機に頻した際の非常手段以外に
は使用してはならないという掟がある。
そして、その力を行使するにあたっては、 皇女
の意志のもとに行われなくてはならないという。
なぜなら、ラグーン城から湧きだす水は、域が
地上から離れたとたんに輝きを失い、臣民達の
生活を危うくするために他ならない。
The royal family of Lake Leland possess the power to move Lagoon Castle. This
bloodline tends to pass particularly to the firstborn princess[1]. But this
power, by law, is not used except as an emergency measure in times when the
kingdom experiences recurring crises.
Moreover, the law says that this power is only to be used at the discretion of
the princess[2]. This is because the water that springs from Lagoon Castle loses
its radiance as soon as the castle leaves ground, and no other should endanger
the lives of her subjects[3]. 

[1] I know I said earlier that 「皇子」 is a particularly special term for Thor,
    being the literal incarnation of evil... but here they use the corresponding
    term 「皇女」 for someone who's just the daughter of a king rather than an
    emperor. So, I don't know. Maybe they're just being fancy.
[2] 「皇女の意志のもとに行う」 (lit: "to carry out by the princess's intention's
    authority"?) seems like a pretty fancy phrase... I think this is more or
    less what it means, but I'm not totally sure. 「もと」 has a lot of meanings.  
[3] lit: "for the purpose of making subjects' lives risky, there cannot be
    others"? Or something like that.

# Items

Short Sword
手頃な値段で入手できる、最もポ
ピュラーな剣。使いやすい為、数
多くの冒険者が好んで装備してい
るがあまり威力はない。
A very popular sword which can be obtained for a moderate price. For its ease of
use, it has become the preferred equipment of many adventurers, although it is
not very strong.

Silver Sword
その名前が示す通り銀で作った剣
である。一般の武器では殺せない
魔物を相手に闘うのに適した剣で
魔を封じる力がある。
As its name indicates, this is a sword made of silver. It is a sword suitable
for fighting as opponents monsters which cannot be killed with ordinary weapons,
and it has the power to seal demons.

Magic Sword
刃で斬るというよりもむしろ、魔
力で斬るという剣、強い魔力を刀
身に秘めており、ほとんどの魔法
に対応している。
A sword that cuts with magical power rather than with a sharp edge, it conceals
a strong magic within its blade, and it supports most magic. 

Force Sword
この剣を使う者の気合いが、高け
れば高いほど剣の力が引き出され、
切れ味が増していく。しかし気力
のない者がこの剣を使うとただの
なまくらとなる。
If the user of this sword has a strong fighting spirit, the sword will draw upon
that high amount of strength, and the sharpness of its blade will increase. But
if a weak-willed person uses this sword, it will become only blunt.

Moon Blade
伝説の勇者にのみ、使いこなすこ
とがでぎるという幻の名剣。レイ
クリーランドのどこか地中深くに
眠るムーンストーンでできている。
A phantasmal sword, it is said that only a legendary hero can master it. It is
made from a Moonstone that sleeps deep underground somewhere in Lake Leland. 

Iron Shield
レベルの低い戦士にも使える、ビ
ギナー向けの盾である。鉄の盾と
呼ばれているが、実際のところ厚
い木の板の上に薄い鉄板を張り付
け耐久力を上げただけの物が多い。
Also useful to low-level soldiers, this is a shield intended for beginners.
Although it is called an "iron shield," there are many that are only attach a
thin iron plate to the top of a heavy wooden board to increase its endurance. 

Large Shield
身体の半身を覆うぐらいの面積が
ある。重量も面積に比例して重い
が、敵の攻撃をはじき返すのに、
おおいに役立つであろう。
Its size covers around half the height of the body. It has a heavy weight,
proportional to its size, but it is very useful for repelling enemy attacks.

Great Shield
防御の魔力を封じた宝珠が埋め込
まれており、その防御力は、Large
Shieldなど比べ物にならないく
らいに高い。
With a gem that seals protective magic embedded in it, its defensive power is
beyond comparison to a Large Shield.

Maxim Shield
Great Shieldの強化版、宝珠が
2つ埋め込まれており、敵の放っ
た攻撃呪文にも高い抵抗力がある。
大きさのわりに扱いやすいのが特
徴。
A strengthened version of the Great Shield, with two jewels embedded, it has
high resistance even against attack spells fired by enemies. It features easy
handling relative to its size.

Moon Shield
中心にムーンストーンが埋め込ま
れ、さらに宝珠が８つムーンスト
ーンの周りを囲むように配置し、
さらに盾そのものにも魔法防御を
施した金でできている、最強の盾。
With a Moonstone embedded in it and eight more Moonstones in a pattern around
its circumference, as well as defensive magic applied to the gold from which the
shield itself is made, this is the strongest of shields.

Plate Mail
ナセルが最初から着用している鎧。
加工した鉄板をつなぎ合わせたも
ので、かなりの耐久力がある。
The armor that Nassel wears from the beginning. As it is made of manufactured
iron plates tied together, he has considerable stamina. 

Gold Armor
プレイトメイルの上に魔法をかけ
た金箔をコーティングしたもので、
魔法攻撃に対する抵抗ができる。
A suit of Plate Mail coated with magic-infused gold leaf, it can resist magical
attacks directed at it.

Sonic Armor
見た目は普通のプレイトメイルの
様に見えるがその表面には薄い防
御フィールドがあり、かなりの打
撃にもびくともしない。
It looks like ordinary Plate Mail, but it has a thin protective field on its
surface that will not yield even to considerable force.

Thunder Armor
雷の鎧と言われているが、放電し
ている訳ではない。電磁バリアの
ようなものが鎧を包んでいて、ダ
メージを弾きかえすようになって
いる。
Despite its name, this armor won't shock you. Something like an electromagnetic
barrier envelops this armor, and this makes it repel damage.

Moon Armor
ムーンストーンを鎧にしたもので、
それも勇者のために作られた鎧で
ある。それだけに防御力は最強を
誇り、向こう所敵なしである。
This Moonstone made into armor, and armor fashioned for the sake of the hero. As
such, it boasts the strongest defensive power and has no competition.

ライ麦パン
ナセルのお母さん手作
りのパンで、なかなか
おいしいと評判。
Rye Bread
Bread homemade by Nassel's mother, reputed to be quite delicious.

村長の手紙
アトランド村長直筆の
手紙である。出発の日
に入手できる。
This is a letter in the handwriting of Atland's mayor. It can be obtained on the
day of your departure.

転移のマント
名のある魔道士が、呪
文で魔力を封じ込めた
マント。
Cloak of Mobility
A cloak where a famous mage confined magic power with a charm. 

ムーンストーン
伝説にある、神々の聖
剣の破片が鉱石に姿を
変えたといわれる。
Said to be a fragment of the holy sword of the gods that exists in legend,
changed in shape into an ore.

冷気の壺
ある場所で必ず必要に
なるが、どこで入手で
きるかは不明。
Chillwind Vase
There is a place where this will become indispensable, but where it can be
obtained is unclear.

羽衣の鐘
この鐘の澄んだ音色は
精霊達を呼び出すこと
ができるという。
Angel Bell
The clear tone of this bell is able to summon spirits[1].

(There are actually two readings of 「精霊」. Read as しょうりょう, it refers specifically
 to spirits of the dead. Read as せいれい, it can also include spirits that live in
 the natural world. It's probably the latter reading that they intend here.)

毛皮のマント
極塞の地に生む動物の
毛皮をマントの裏地に
縫いつけたもので、保
温性が高い。
[Very likely that 極塞  is a typo for 極寒.]
Fur Cloak
With the fur of animals that live in the coldest lands sewn into it, this cloak
is highly insulating.

破邪の剣
封印された扉を開ける。
Exorcist Blade
Opens a sealed door.

ポーション
HPがやや回復する。
Potion
Recovers HP partially.

エリクサー
HPが全快する。
Elixir
Recovers HP fully.

命の珠
死の国から舞い房るこ
とができる。
[舞い房る is very likely a typo for 舞い戻る.]
Pearl of Life
Allows you to return from the land of death.

輝きの石
MPが全快する。
Radiant Stone
Recovers MP fully.

光の石
MPがやや回復する。
Recovers MP partially.

守りの指輪
防御力を高める
力を秘めている。
Ring of Defense
Holds the power to enhance your defense.

力の指輪
この指輪をはめ
ると筋力が増し、
攻撃力が高まる。
Ring of Power
When you wear this ring, your strength is increased, and your attack power
rises.

防護の指輪
あらゆる攻撃を
はねのけること
ができる。
Ring of Protection
Allows you to brush off every attack.

治癒の指輪
戦いで受けた傷
を癒してくれる
指輪である。
Ring of Recovery
This is a ring that heals wounds received in battle.

時の指輪
時間の流れを止
めてしまうとい
うとてつもない
力を秘めている
指輪。
Ring of Time
A ring that holds the incredible power to completely stop the flow of time.
